6
2
0
2

b
e
F
7
2

]

B
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
9
9
3
2
.
2
0
6
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

GPU-Native Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search with
IVF-RaBitQ: Fast Index Build and Search

Jifan Shi
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
jifan002@e.ntu.edu.sg

Jianyang Gao
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
gaoj0017@e.ntu.edu.sg

James Xia
NVIDIA
USA
jamxia@nvidia.com

Tamás Béla Fehér
NVIDIA
Germany
tfeher@nvidia.com

Cheng Long
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
c.long@ntu.edu.sg

ABSTRACT
Approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) on GPUs is gaining
increasing popularity for modern retrieval and recommendation
workloads that operate over massive high-dimensional vectors.
Graph-based indexes deliver high recall and throughput but in-
cur heavy build-time and storage costs. In contrast, cluster-based
methods build and scale efficiently yet often need many probes for
high recall, straining memory bandwidth and compute. Aiming to
simultaneously achieve fast index build, high-throughput search,
high recall, and low storage requirement for GPUs, we present
IVF-RaBitQ (GPU), a GPU-native ANNS solution that integrates
the cluster-based method IVF with RaBitQ quantization into an effi-
cient GPU index build/search pipeline. Specifically, for index build,
we develop a scalable GPU-native RaBitQ quantization method
that enables fast and accurate low-bit encoding at scale. For search,
we develop GPU-native distance computation schemes for RaBitQ
codes and a fused search kernel to achieve high throughput with
high recall. With IVF-RaBitQ implemented and integrated into the
NVIDIA cuVS Library, experiments on cuVS Bench across multiple
datasets show that IVF-RaBitQ offers a strong performance fron-
tier in recall, throughput, index build time, and storage footprint.
For Recall≈0.95, IVF-RaBitQ achieves 2.2× higher QPS than the
state-of-the-art graph-based method CAGRA, while also construct-
ing indices 7.7× faster on average. Compared to the cluster-based
method IVF-PQ, IVF-RaBitQ delivers on average over 2.7× higher
throughput while avoiding accessing the raw vectors for reranking.

Artifact Availability:
The source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available at
https://github.com/VectorDB-NTU/cuvs_rabitq.

1 INTRODUCTION
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (ANNS) on high-
dimensional vector data has become a fundamental component in
modern data management and machine learning. It supports key
applications such as semantic search [4], Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (RAG) [12], and recommender systems [8, 13, 31]. With the
widespread adoption of embedding-based models [11, 19, 41, 42],
production workloads now often involve massive high-dimensional
vectors [47, 51]. As a result, designing scalable and efficient ANNS
solutions has become a long-standing and active research topic.

A variety of ANNS solutions have been proposed, among which
graph-based methods and cluster-based methods are most com-
monly used in industrial systems. Graph-based methods usually
construct proximity graphs over data points and perform greedy
traversal to locate nearest neighbors. Representative algorithms,
such as HNSW [36], NSG [15], and Vamana graph [23], are known
for their competitive recall-performance trade-offs. Cluster-based
methods, most notably inverted-file (IVF) indices, partition the
vector space into coarse clusters and restrict search to a subset of
clusters. These methods offer simple data organization and efficient
index construction, which enable easy integration with existing
database systems. Furthermore, both types of methods are often en-
hanced by leveraging vector quantization for reducing the costs of
storing and accessing raw vectors and/or the costs of computing dis-
tances among raw vectors [1, 16, 20, 23, 28]. Most of these solutions
were originally developed and optimized for CPU architectures.

As data scale and query volume continue to grow, many real-
world ANNS deployments choose to use GPUs as their accelera-
tors due to GPUs’ massive parallelism and high memory band-
width. For instance, Faiss has deployed GPU-based ANNS li-
brary cuVS to handle large-scale batched queries offline 1. Ex-
isting GPU-based ANNS methods largely follow the same two
paradigms as their CPU counterparts, namely graph-based ap-
proaches [21, 26, 29, 40, 48, 49, 53, 54, 57] and cluster-based ap-
proaches [6, 24, 46, 50, 52, 56]. Graph-based GPU methods re-
design proximity graph building and traversal to better match
GPU execution, leveraging warp-level parallelism, shared-memory
caching, and fine-grained scheduling to mitigate control-flow di-
vergence and irregular memory access. Representative systems
such as SONG [57], cuHNSW [26], GGNN [21], and CAGRA [40]
demonstrate that graph-based ANNS can achieve strong recall and
competitive query performance on GPUs.

Compared with graph-based indices, cluster-based GPU methods
offer a different set of trade-offs. A key merit is that cluster-based
methods expose regular computation patterns that align well with
GPU primitives: coarse cluster selection can be implemented using
dense linear algebra (e.g., GEMM for computing query–centroid
distances), and the subsequent probing within selected clusters can
be parallelized as large, contiguous streams of codes or vectors.
This makes it natural to exploit GPU batching and achieve high

1https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/enhancing-gpu-accelerated-vector-search-in-
faiss-with-nvidia-cuvs/

 
 
 
 
 
 
throughput. Moreover, cluster-based indices typically have simpler
structures than proximity graphs, with more predictable memory
access, which eases GPU memory management and improves mem-
ory coalescing.

Motivated by the above considerations, this paper focuses on
cluster-based ANNS methods on GPUs. Within this family, IVF-Flat
and IVF-PQ are widely used baselines [24, 33, 43, 46, 56]. IVF-Flat
stores full-precision vectors and performs brute-force scanning
within selected clusters. Its accuracy is strong, but the scan stage is
often dominated by memory bandwidth due to high-dimensional
floating-point loads. IVF-PQ reduces memory traffic by compressing
vectors using product quantization (PQ) [28]. However, it requires
learning codebooks during index construction, introducing addi-
tional overhead on building complexity. Also, the compressed rep-
resentation only provides approximate distance estimates without
strict accuracy guarantees. As a result, achieving high recall often
requires reranking with the raw vectors (e.g., raw vectors are stored
in main memory and are accessed during search), which increases
the memory footprint and complicates the overall pipeline.

Recently, a new vector quantization method called RaBitQ was
proposed [17, 18], which improves upon PQ in several important
aspects. First, RaBitQ does not require codebook training. Second,
RaBitQ enables more accurate distance estimation with tight, the-
oretically grounded error bounds, which can eliminate the need
to rerank candidates using raw vectors when targeting high recall.
RaBitQ has been combined with IVF for CPU-based ANN search
and has shown consistent improvements over PQ [17, 18]. Never-
theless, bringing RaBitQ to GPUs and integrating it with IVF is
non-trivial and introduces several algorithmic and system chal-
lenges. Specifically, the quantization procedure of RaBitQ involves
searching over rescaling factors and evaluating candidates, which
can be expensive and control-flow heavy. When implemented on
CPU, RaBitQ’s distance evaluation step benefits from wide SIMD
vectorization and specialized bit-level routines (e.g., AVX-512-style
packed/shuffle operations and fast bit-scan / popcount primitives)
to accelerate asymmetric inner products and reduce per-dimension
overhead [16]. On GPUs with SIMT (Single Instruction, Multiple
Thread) execution models, the control-flow heavy quantization
becomes warp-divergent, and the CPU SIMD-optimized distance
kernels have no direct equivalent. A naive port either underutilizes
the GPU or incurs excessive memory traffic and kernel overhead. Re-
alizing RaBitQ effectively on GPUs therefore requires GPU-native
design, including scalable quantization strategies, GPU-oriented
distance-evaluation primitives, and careful integration with the IVF
probe-and-scan pipeline.

In this paper, we present IVF-RaBitQ (GPU) 2, the first GPU-
native ANNS solution that tightly integrates IVF coarse partition-
ing with RaBitQ quantization, for achieving fast index build, high-
throughput search, high recall, and compact storage simultaneously.
We summarize our technical contributions to the development of
IVF-RaBitQ as follows. First, during index build, apart from building
the IVF index, we quantize the data vectors with RaBitQ. For this
task, we design a cluster-at-a-time, block-per-vector quantization

2Since the GPU setting is the focus of this paper, we may refer to it simply as IVF-
RaBitQ in the rest of the paper.

2

pipeline. Within the pipeline, we further develop a two-phase par-
allel grid search algorithm for exploring the rescaling factors in
RaBitQ quantization. These techniques enable scalable and high-
throughput RaBitQ quantization for massive data vectors on GPUs
(e.g., quantizing over 1 million 960-dimensional vectors per second
to 8-bit RaBitQ codes). Second, during search, we adopt a two-
stage distance estimation strategy for finding nearest neighbors of
a query, namely a filtering stage based on the 1-bit RaBitQ code
(which consists of the most significant bit of each diemension of
the code), followed by a refinement stage using the ex-code (which
consists of the remaining bits of each dimension of the code) only
for candidates that pass the filter. Since the filtering stage (which
checkes many data vectors) dominates the overall computation,
we develop two GPU-native inner-product computation schemes,
namely one based on lookup tables and the other based on bitwise
decomposition, to accelerate this stage. Third, we design a fused
cluster-local search kernel for finding nearest neighbors locally
within a cluster, which integrates distance filtering, refinement,
and top-𝐾 selection into a single GPU kernel, substantially reduc-
ing kernel-launch overhead and global-memory traffic. Fourth, to
support the index build and search pipelines, we design a GPU-
oriented index layout that aligns data organization with access
patterns of the fused kernel, enabling high memory coalescing and
cache efficiency.

We integrate IVF-RaBitQ into NVIDIA cuVS library [43] and
cuVS Bench [39], enabling reproducible benchmarking and direct
comparisons with existing GPU baselines under a unified evaluation
framework. We conduct extensive experiments using cuVS Bench
with diverse datasets, demonstrating IVF-RaBitQ’s advantages in
the trade-off among recall, throughput, index build time, and stor-
age footprint. For query performance, we evaluate methods under
large-batch query settings to fully utilize GPU resources. Com-
pared with the state-of-the-art graph-based GPU method, CAGRA,
IVF-RaBitQ achieves comparable or higher throughput (1.3×~5.6×
speedup for Recall≈0.95) while reducing index construction time by
up to order of magnitude (3.4×~13.1× speedup) with far less storage
requirement. Compared with IVF-PQ implemented in NVIDIA cuVS
Library, IVF-RaBitQ achieves significantly higher query throughput
(1.3×~31.4× speedup for Recall≈0.95) and accuracy under similar
index build cost and storage budget. These results show that IVF-
RaBitQ is a practical and scalable solution for large-scale GPU-based
ANNS problems.

For the rest of the paper, we present the preliminaries in Section 2,
the IVF-RaBitQ (GPU) method in Section 3, the experiments in
Section 4, the related work in Section 5, and the conclusion in
Section 6.

2 PRELIMIARIES
2.1 Approximate NN Search and the IVF Index
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (ANNS) finds nearest neigh-
bors of a query vector from a large collection of high-dimensional
data vectors. It involves two phases, namely the index phase and
the query phase. In the index phase, it builds an index on a given
set of 𝑁 vectors O ⊆ R𝐷 . In the query phase, given a query vector
q ∈ R𝐷 , it finds 𝐾 approximate nearest neighbors with the help of
the index. Compared to exact search, ANNS trades a small loss in

accuracy for substantial gains in efficiency. The accuracy of ANNS
is usually measured using recall. For a query vector q, let N𝐾 (q)
denote the set of its exact 𝐾 nearest neighbors, and let ˆN𝐾 (q) be
the 𝐾 neighbors returned by an ANNS algorithm. The recall for
this query is defined as Recall@𝐾 (q) = |N𝐾 (q) ∩ ˆN𝐾 (q)|/𝐾 . That
is, this metric measures how many of the true nearest neighbors of
the query are returned by the approximate search. In this paper, we
target the batched setting: the input queries are provided as a batch
Q ∈ R𝑛𝑞 ×𝐷 , and and we want to find the 𝐾 approximate nearest
neighbors for every query in the batch.

In the IVF index, vectors are first partitioned into clusters using
a clustering algorithm (e.g., K-means [38] or its variations [3, 34]).
When IVF is used for nearest neighbor search, the search process is
usually carried out in two stages [28]. First, given a query vector, a
few nearest clusters are identified based on the distances between
their centroids to the query. Then, these clusters are probed by
computing the distances between the vectors in the clusters and
the query vector and finding the nearest neighbors. With different
settings of the number of clusters to probe, IVF provides different
accuracy-efficiency trade-offs.

2.2 The RaBitQ Quantization Method
We first review the process of quantizing a raw vector or in Ra-
BitQ [17, 18]. First, it normalizes or to a unit vector o wrt a center
vector c, i.e., we have o = or −c
. Then, it focuses on quantizing
∥or −c∥
the unit vector o since the Euclidean distance or dot product be-
tween two raw vectors can be computed based on the dot product
between their normalized vectors and some factors which can be
pre-computed and stored [17, 18]. Specifically, it constructs a code-
book by shifting, normalizing, and randomly rotating vectors whose
coordinates are 𝐵-bit unsigned integers, where 𝐵 could be 1, 2, 3, ....
Formally, given the number of dimensions of a vector 𝐷 and the
number of bits used to quantize each dimension 𝐵, the codebook
Gr is defined as follows:

(cid:40)

G :=

−

2𝐵 − 1
2

+ 𝑢

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

𝑢 = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , 2𝐵 − 1

(cid:41)𝐷

Gr :=

(cid:40)

P

x
∥x∥

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:41)

x ∈ G

(1)

(2)

where P is a random orthogonal matrix [25].

To quantize the vector o, it takes o’s nearest vector in the code-
book Gr, which we denote by ˆo, as its quantized vector. Let ˆx be the
vector in G, which corresponds to ˆo (note that each vector in Gr
corresponds to a vector in G (before normalization and rotation)).
This process can be formally described as follows.

ˆx = arg min

x∈ G

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

P

x
∥x∥

− o

2

(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)
(cid:13)

= arg max
x∈ G

(cid:28) x
∥x∥

(cid:29)

, o′

(3)

where o′ = P−1o is the data vector after rotation.

According to Equation 3, the quantization process is to find ˆx,
which is the vector x ∈ G that maximizes the the cosine similairty
with the data vector after rotation, i.e., o′. According to the analysis
in [17], the vector ˆx must be closest to a re-scaled vector o′ for some
rescaling factor 𝑡, i.e., 𝑡 ·o′. Therefore, while there are 2𝐵·𝐷 vectors in

G, the quantization process does not need to enumerate all of them.
Instead, it only enumerates those which are closest to 𝑡 · o′ for some
𝑡. Furthermore, while there are infinite rescaling factors, there are
only 𝐷 · 2𝐵−1 critical ones, at which the vectors that are closest to
𝑡 · o′ in G would change [17]. As a result, the quantization process
can explore these critical rescaling factors only. In summary, the
quantization process is to identify and enumerate 𝐷 · 2𝐵−1 critical
rescaling factors. For each factor 𝑡, it finds the vector x in G that is
closest to 𝑡 · o′ and computes its cosine similarity with o′. Finally,
it returns the vector ˆx, which has the greatest cosine similarity.

Given a raw query vector qr, we review the process of estimat-
ing the Euclidean distance between qr and a raw data vector or in
RaBitQ as follows. It first rotates qr with the same matrix P used for
rotating the data vectors. We denote the query vector after rotation
by q′. It then estimates the distance between qr and or based on sev-
eral variables: namely (1) the dot product between the RaBitQ code
of o, i.e., ˆx, and the rotated query vector, q′ and (2) some factors [16].
Note that some of these factors are independent on the query and
can be pre-computed before the query is known. Other factors can
only be computed given the query, but can be shared among data
vectors so that the amortized cost for computing the factors for
each data vector is negligible. As a result, the cost of estimating
the distance is dominated by that of computing the dot product
between ˆx and q′. For detailed expressions of the computation, we
refer readers to the documentation of the RaBitQ Library 3.

2.3 NVIDIA GPU Architecture
2.3.1 Thread Hierarchy. NVIDIA GPU implements the Single In-
struction Multiple Threads (SIMT) execution model. The basic
scheduling and execution unit in the GPU is the warp, which is a
group of 32 threads. All the threads in a warp execute the same
instructions and can use warp-level primitives to communicate
and exchange data. If threads within a single warp take different
conditional paths, this scenario constitutes warp divergence which
carries a performance penalty. A group of warps are organized
as a thread block. The block serves as the basic unit that can be
independently scheduled onto a Streaming Multiprocessor (SM),
which is the physical core unit on the GPU. Multiple blocks can
be resident on a single SM simultaneously, depending on resource
availability and kernel requirements. A group of blocks constitutes
a grid. A grid is the top-level organizational structure to execute
a single kernel, which is a function launched from the host (CPU)
and executed on the device (GPU).

2.3.2 Memory Hierarchy. GPU memory hierarchy is critical to the
design of a GPU-based solution. At the bottom, there is a global
memory (also known as device memory), which serves as the pri-
mary storage for data and can be accessed by all threads. The global
memory has the largest space and the highest latency on the GPU,
and the locality of data access to the global memory is critical to
the efficiency. Specifically, global memory accesses are issued at
the warp level. When threads within a warp access contiguous
and aligned memory addresses, the accesses can be coalesced into
fewer memory transactions, which effectively exploits the band-
width of global memory. Upon the global memory, there is a cache

3https://vectordb-ntu.github.io/RaBitQ-Library/rabitq/estimator/

3

level named L2 cache, which keeps data read/written to the global
memory and is shared among all SMs. For each SM, there is an L1
cache and shared memory that use the same hardware. This type of
memory has low latency and can only be shared for threads within
an SM. At the top, each SM has 32-bit registers, which are private
to threads and have the lowest read/write latency.

IVF-RaBitQ, it is used to store the IVF index in GPU global memory,
which has separate contiguous arrays for 1-bit codes, ex-codes,
and auxiliary factors. We further adopt an interleaved layout for
1-bit codes that is tailored to the access pattern of the dominant
filter stage, leading to improved memory coalescing on the GPU
(Section 3.4.3).

3 THE GPU-BASED IVF-RABITQ METHOD
3.1 Overview
IVF-RaBitQ (GPU) is a GPU-native ANNS solution that combines an
IVF coarse partition with RaBitQ quantization and implements both
index build and search as GPU-friendly pipelines. The overview of
its workflow is described as follows.
Index build. Given a set of 𝑁 raw data vectors O ∈ R𝑁 ×𝐷 ( 𝐷
is the vector dimensionality), we first learn 𝑛𝑘 IVF centroids and
assign each data vector to its nearest centroid, thereby forming
𝑛𝑘 inverted lists. Within each cluster, we normalize the vectors
with respect to the centroid, rotate them with a random orthogonal
matrix P, and quantize them using RaBitQ and obtain their codes.
Each code is stored in two parts: (i) the most significant bit of each
dimension (which we call the 1-bit RaBitQ code or simply the 1-
bit code) and (ii) the remaining bits (which we call the ex-code).
To enable efficient large-scale RaBitQ quantization on GPU, we
write GPU kernels to process vectors in a cluster-wise manner, and
develop GPU-friendly algorithms for exploring the rescaling factors
used in RaBitQ quantization (Section 3.2).

In IVF-RaBitQ, queries are processed in batches
Search.
(Section 3.3). Given a query batch Q ∈ R𝑛𝑞 ×𝐷 and a probe count
𝑛probe, we first apply the same random orthogonal transformation
P used in index build to the queries and select the 𝑛probe closest IVF
clusters for each query. The search workload is then organized at the
granularity of (query, cluster) pairs, enabling independent and paral-
lel processing within each probed cluster. For each (query, cluster)
pair, we perform a cluster-local search that evaluates candidates
stored in the corresponding inverted list and finds the top-𝐾 can-
didates (i.e., 𝐾 nearest neighbors) of the query within the cluster.
Specifically, it adopts a two-stage distance estimation strategy: a
filtering stage based on the 1-bit RaBitQ code, followed by a refine-
ment stage using the ex-code only for candidates that pass the filter.
Since the filtering stage checks many data vectors and dominates
the overall computation, we design GPU-native inner-product com-
putation methods to accelerate this stage (Section 3.4.1), and further
integrate it with filtering, refinement, and top-𝐾 selection into a
fused GPU kernel to reduce kernel-launch and memory-access over-
heads (Section 3.4.2). Finally, the top-𝐾 candidates obtained from
all probed clusters are merged to produce the global top-𝐾 result
for each query.

GPU index layout. To efficiently support ANNS on GPU, we
design a flattened Compressed Sparse Row (CSR)-like layout [5].
Intuitively, after K-means training, each vector is assigned to ex-
actly one cluster. If we conceptually use a binary matrix of size
num_clusters×num_vectors, where entry (𝑖, 𝑗) = 1 indicates that
vector 𝑗 belongs to cluster 𝑖 (and 0 otherwise), the resulting matrix
is a sparse matrix since each column contains only one non-zero
entry. Thus, the data can be organized into a CSR-like format. In

4

3.2 Index Build on GPU
3.2.1 Clustering, Normalization and Rotation. We run GPU-based
Balanced K-means [44] to learn 𝑛𝑘 centroids and assign each data-
base vector to its nearest centroid. This produces the centroid matrix
C ∈ R𝑛𝑘 ×𝐷 and a cluster id for each vector. Within each cluster,
we normalize each vector to unit ℓ2 norm wrt its corresponding
centroid. For simplicity, when the context is clear, we refer to the
normalized vectors as (data) vectors and denote a data vector by
o. We then apply a shared random orthogonal matrix P to rotate
data vectors and centroids, which is implemented using General
Matrix Multiplication (GEMM). Since P is orthogonal, the rota-
tion preserves inner products and distances between data vectors,
centroids, and therefore does not alter exact nearest-neighbor rela-
tionships. We denote a data vector after rotation by o′.

3.2.2 GPU-based RaBitQ Quantization for Data Vectors. Given a
set of 𝑁 data vectors o and a budget of 𝐵 bits per dimension, we aim
to develop a GPU-based solution for quantizing the data vectors
using RaBitQ, i.e., computing the RaBitQ codes of the data vectors.
Kernel granularity and thread mapping. We first decide the ker-
nel granularity (i.e., how many vectors are processed per launch),
which directly affects the parallelism effectiveness by determining
how computation and memory resources are scheduled. Quantizing
one vector at a time is prohibitively expensive when the dataset
contains millions to billions of vectors, because kernel-launch over-
head and per-vector scheduling costs accumulate quickly, and the
GPU’s massive parallelism (hundreds of thousands of concurrent
threads) is difficult to fully utilize. At the other extreme, quantiz-
ing all vectors at once can saturate the GPU, but it imposes a high
GPU memory footprint (especially for intermediate buffers) and is
inflexible across datasets of different sizes. We therefore adopt a
cluster-at-a-time design: each kernel launch processes the vectors
in one cluster, which gives a natural and bounded unit of work
aligned with the IVF structure, and makes the implementation
largely data-size independent.

Next, we decide the mapping between GPU execution units and
vectors. A straightforward approach is to assign a single thread
to each vector, analogous to the parallelization strategy typically
employed on CPUs. However, this prevents intra-vector paralleliza-
tion: the computation required by RaBitQ for a single vector (which
involves exploring multiple critical scaling factors) becomes seri-
alized within one thread, limiting throughput. Moreover, adjacent
threads in a warp would typically access different vectors located
at different regions in global memory, which can easily lead to
uncoalesced memory accesses and lower effective bandwidth. Addi-
tionally, under a cluster-at-a-time execution schedule, the number
of concurrently processed vectors may be insufficient to fully utilize
the GPU. Thus, we adopt a block-per-vector mapping as a robust and
flexible design point, which has several advantages: (1) it enables
fine-grained parallelism for that vector, e.g., it can explore multiple

critical scaling factors in parallel; and (2) the threads in the same
warp access contiguous (or near-contiguous) locations of the same
vector, yielding coalesced global-memory accesses. This improves
both compute efficiency and memory throughput, and makes it
easier to maintain high occupancy even when operating cluster by
cluster.
Efficient exploration of rescaling factors. The standard Ra-
BitQ quantization algorithm enumerates 𝐷 · 2𝐵−1 critical rescaling
factors in ascending order and evaluates them using incremen-
tal updates [17]. To support this efficient enumeration, previous
CPU implementation maintains per-vector state, typically using
a small priority queue to generate the next rescaling factor with-
out explicitly materializing or sorting all candidates [17]. However,
this sequential enumeration relies on fine-grained state updates
and involves irregular control flow, which is not friendly to GPU
execution model.

To achieve high accuracy across dimensionalities while main-
taining high performance, we propose a GPU-friendly search for
the rescaling factor. Recall that the quantization process of RaBitQ
explores a set of ciritical rescaling factors. For each factor 𝑡, it iden-
tifies a vector x ∈ G (which is the closest to 𝑡 · o′) and computes
, o′(cid:69) (or ⟨x, o′⟩ /∥x∥). Finally, it returns the
the dot product (cid:68) x
∥x∥
vector ˆx, which has the greatest dot prodcut. This quantization
process can be regarded as one of optimizing an objective function
⟨x, o′⟩ /∥x∥ of 𝑡. We observe this objective function is often approx-
imately unimodal in practice (i.e., it tends to increase then decrease
with a single peak (possibly with small local fluctuations)). A classi-
cal ternary search locates the maximum of a unimodal function by
repeatedly shrinking the interval; however, it is inherently iterative
and not ideal for GPU control flow.

Inspired by ternary search, we adopt a two-phase grid search
that achieves a similar coarse-to-fine narrowing effect using a fixed
number of GPU-parallel rounds. The pseudocode of our algorithm
is presented in Algorithm 1. Given a 𝐷-dimensional normalized
vector o′ (after rotation) and bit-width 𝐵, we first compute the
𝑖 | via a parallel reduction
maximum absolute entry max𝑜 = max𝑖 |𝑜 ′
across dimensions, which is used to determine the search range
[𝑡start, 𝑡end] (line 1~2). The algorithm then proceeds in two phases.
In the coarse search phase (line 3~10), we uniformly sample 𝑁coarse
candidate rescaling factors across the search range and evaluate
them in parallel using multiple threads. For each candidate 𝑡, we
find the code xcur that is closest to 𝑡 · o′ and compute the objec-
tive ⟨xcur, o′⟩/∥xcur ∥. A parallel reduction then identifies the best
candidate 𝑡center. In the fine search phase (line 11~20), we narrow
the search range to a small neighborhood around 𝑡center and repeat
the parallel evaluation with 𝑁fine samples to refine the solution.
The final rescaling factor 𝑡max is used to produce the quantization
code ˆx. On the GPU, for each rescaling factor, we assign a thread
block to do the sampling and the reduction in parallel. In this way,
the algorithm can finish in 𝑂 (1) rounds on the GPU, which signifi-
cantly outperforms the standard quantization algorithm (𝑂 (𝐷 · 2𝐵)
complexity).

3.3 Search Pipeline on GPU
3.3.1 Batch Rotation. Let Q ∈ R𝑛𝑞 ×𝐷 be a batch of queries. We
rotate the batch using the same shared orthogonal matrix P as in

5

Algorithm 1: Two-Phase Parallel Grid-Search for RaBitQ
Quantization
Input: A 𝐷-dimensional rotated normalized vector o′; the

number of bits per dimension 𝐵;

Output: The quantization code ˆx.

1 max𝑜 ← ParallelMax(|o′|);
2 Initialize 𝑡start and 𝑡end based on max𝑜 and 𝐵;
3 𝑣max ← 0,

𝑡max ← 𝑡start;

4 for 𝑡 in uniform grid over [𝑡start, 𝑡end] with 𝑁coarse samples do

in parallel

Find the code xcur that is closest to 𝑡 · o′ and compute
⟨xcur, o′⟩ and ∥xcur ∥ ;
if ⟨xcur, o′⟩/∥xcur ∥ > 𝑣max then
𝑣max ← ⟨xcur, o′⟩/∥xcur ∥,

𝑡max ← 𝑡;

5

6

7

end

8
9 end
10 𝑡center ← ParallelArgMax(𝑣max, 𝑡max);

11 𝛿 ← (𝑡end − 𝑡start)/(𝑁coarse − 1);
start ← max(𝑡start, 𝑡center − 𝛿), 𝑡 ′

12 𝑡 ′
13 𝑣max ← 0,
𝑡max ← 𝑡center;
14 for 𝑡 in uniform grid over [𝑡 ′

end ← min(𝑡end, 𝑡center + 𝛿);

start, 𝑡 ′

end] with 𝑁fine samples do

in parallel

Find the code xcur that is closest to 𝑡 · o′ and compute
⟨xcur, o′⟩ and ∥xcur ∥ ;
if ⟨xcur, o′⟩/∥xcur ∥ > 𝑣max then
𝑣max ← ⟨xcur, o′⟩/∥xcur ∥,

𝑡max ← 𝑡;

15

16

17

end

18
19 end
20 𝑡max ← ParallelArgMax(𝑣max, 𝑡max);
21 Compute ˆx via rescaling and rounding of o′ with 𝑡max;
22 return ˆx;

the index build. This operation is implemented as a single GEMM
on the GPU, producing a contiguous rotated query batch Q′ that is
reused by all subsequent stages in the search pipeline.

3.3.2 Cluster Selection. We select the 𝑛probe closest clusters for
each query. Let C ∈ R𝑛𝑘 ×𝐷 be the centroid matrix and Q′ ∈ R𝑛𝑞 ×𝐷
be the rotated query batch. The squared Euclidean distance matrix
between queries and centroids can be written in matrix form as

D = sq1⊤

c − 2 Q′C⊤,

𝑛𝑘 + 1𝑛𝑞 s⊤
where sq ∈ R𝑛𝑞 and sc ∈ R𝑛𝑘 store the squared ℓ2 norms of queries
and centroids, respectively. The dominant term Q′C⊤ is computed
via a single GEMM on the GPU, and a parallel top-𝐾 kernel [55] is
then used to select the 𝑛probe nearest clusters per query.

(4)

3.3.3 Probe Scheduling via Workload Reorganization. After clus-
ter selection, we reorganize the workload explicitly as a set of
(query, cluster) pairs, one pair per probed cluster of each query.
We sort these pairs by cluster identifier before launching the search
kernels. This reorganization is adopted from cuVS’s IVF-PQ [43],

which converts the irregular per-query probe lists into an execu-
tion order that is friendly to GPU: first, blocks that process the
same (or nearby) clusters execute closer in time, improving cache
locality for the RaBitQ codes; second, the clusters of a fixed query
across the batch are less likely to be probed concurrently, which
gives a tigher running top-𝐾 thershold (i.e., the current 𝐾-th best
distance for each query) to enable more aggressive pruning in later
probes. Before these workloads are mapped to SMs on the GPU, we
compute query-dependent factors once per query and prepare the
query representation needed by the chosen inner-product method
(Section 3.4.1); these results are reused across that query’s 𝑛probe
cluster scans.

3.3.4 Cluster-local Search and Two-stage Distance Estimation. For
each (query, cluster) pair, we compute cluster-local top-𝐾 candi-
dates (which are the query’s 𝐾 nearest neighbors locally within the
the cluster) using a two-stage estimator:

• Stage 1 (filter): compute a fast 1-bit distance estimate (and
a lower bound) based on the 1-bit RaBitQ code and prune
vectors whose values exceed the current threshold (i.e., the
current 𝐾-th best distance for each query).

• Stage 2 (refinement): for the surviving candidates, read
additional bits of the RaBitQ code (ex-code) to compute
a more accurate estimated distance and then select the
cluster-local top-𝐾 candidates.

For simplicity, we refer to the estimated distances in Stage 1 and
Stage 2 as the 1-bit estimated distance and the refined estimated dis-
tance, respectively. Since the inner-product computation between
the query and the 1-bit RaBitQ codes in Stage 1 dominates the com-
putation (note that the computation is conducted for all vectors
in the probed clusters) [16], we develop two GPU-native inner-
product computation schemes tailored to the GPU execution model
(Section 3.4.1). Moreover, this two-stage estimator is realized on
the GPU as a four-step cluster-local search procedure, including (1)
1-bit estimated distance computation, (2) candidate selection (i.e.,
retaining vectors whose estimated distances pass the current thresh-
old), (3) refined estimated distance computation, and (4) in-block
top-𝐾 selection (i.e., selecting the best 𝐾 candidates within a thread
block). These steps are fused into a single GPU kernel to reduce
kernel launch overhead and global-memory traffic (Section 3.4.2).

3.3.5 Batch-level Merge. Each block outputs cluster-local candi-
dates. For each query, we merge candidates from its 𝑛probe clusters
and run a GPU top-𝐾 to produce the final approximate nearest
neighbours.

3.4 Kernel and Data-Layout Co-design
3.4.1 GPU Inner-Product Computation for 1-bit Estimated Distance.
Recall in RaBitQ, we need to compute the inner product between a
query vector q′ (after rotation) and the 1-bit RaBitQ code of a data
vector, which we denote by ˆxb, for computing the 1-bit estimated
distance between the query and the vector (Section 2.2). That is,
the inner product is computed in an asymmetric form, where query
vectors are represented in higher precision (e.g., floating-point),
while data vectors are encoded as compact 1-bit RaBitQ codes. Exist-
ing CPU-oriented acceleration techniques [16] are based on SIMD

instructions and cannot be directly ported to GPUs due to funda-
mental differences in execution models and available instruction
sets. Thus, a straightforward approach would be to expand the
binary codes into byte values and reuse conventional inner-product
operators. However, such a design is inefficient on GPUs, as it in-
troduces unnecessary type conversions and leads to suboptimal
utilization of GPU compute and memory resources.

To address the problem, we develop two GPU-native inner-
product computation schemes for this type of inner product. The
first scheme adopts a lookup table based strategy that trades shared-
memory capacity for reduced arithmetic operations, while the sec-
ond scheme reformulates the inner product into a bitwise decom-
position that exploits GPU-friendly bitwise operations. These two
schemes represent different design points in the trade-off between
arithmetic intensity and on-chip memory usage, and are described
in detail below.
(1) Lookup Table based Strategy. We first consider a memory-
centric strategy that replaces arithmetic operations with table
lookups by leveraging GPU shared memory. Specifically, we pre-
compute query-dependent lookup tables (LUTs) and reuse them
across all data vectors when evaluating the 1-bit estimated distance.
Different from GPU implementations of IVF-PQ (e.g., cuVS [43])
that build LUTs over PQ codewords (i.e., per PQ dimen-
sion/subspace), we construct LUTs that aggregate inner-product
contributions over multiple dimensions of the 1-bit RaBitQ code.
Formally, we partition the dimensions into groups of 𝑈 bits and
construct multiple lookup tables accordingly. Let 𝑚 = 𝐷/𝑈 be the
number of partitioned blocks, and
ˆx( 𝑗 )
b

, q′ ( 𝑗 ) ∈ R𝑈 ,

𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑚

be the subvectors corresponding to the 𝑗-th block of the 1-bit code
ˆxb and the query vector (after rotation) q′, respectively. For each
block, we precompute a lookup table (LUT) that stores the inner
products between q′ ( 𝑗 ) and all possible 2𝑈 binary patterns and
store the values. Specifically, given the 𝑗th block, we define the
corresponding LUT as follows:

𝐿𝑗 : {0, 1}𝑈 → R

(5)

𝐿𝑗 (b) = ⟨q′ ( 𝑗 ), b⟩ =

𝑈
∑︁

𝑖=1

q′ [( 𝑗 − 1)𝑈 + 𝑖] · b[𝑖] , b ∈ {0, 1}𝑈

(6)

Given a binary code vector ˆxb, the inner product ⟨ˆxb, q′⟩ can then
be computed by summing the LUT entries corresponding to each
block:

⟨ˆxb, q′⟩ =

𝑚
∑︁

𝑗=1

⟨ˆx( 𝑗 )
b

, q′ ( 𝑗 ) ⟩ =

𝑚
∑︁

𝑗=1

𝐿𝑗 (cid:0) ˆx( 𝑗 )
b

(cid:1).

(7)

In practice, each binary block ˆx( 𝑗 )
is interpreted as an integer index
b
𝑘 ∈ {0, . . . , 2𝑈 − 1}, allowing the inner product computation to be
performed via 𝑚 table lookups followed by a summation.

According to Section 2.2, in IVF-RaBitQ, the inner product be-
tween ˆxb and q′ has no relationship with which cluster ˆxb belongs
to. That is, to compute the 1-bit estimated distance between a query
vector and different data vectors, the LUTs only need to be com-
puted once and can be reused across all data vectors. For each query,
we have 𝐷/𝑈 LUTs, where each LUT uses the 𝑈 bits as entry and has

6

Figure 1: Bitwise Inner Product Computation. ˆxb [𝑖] denotes the 𝑖th dimension (bit) of the data vector ˆxb, and ˆq( 𝑗 ) [𝑖] denotes the
𝑗th bit of the query vector’s 𝑖th dimension ˆq[𝑖].

a size of sizeof(lut_type) × 2𝑈 bytes. To enable high-throughput
execution, an ideal case should be that LUTs from different queries
can reside in an SM’s shared memory (e.g., up to 164 KB on Ampere
and 228 KB on Hopper-class GPUs) at the same time, so that multi-
ple queries can be processed concurrently on a single SM. Thus, we
set 𝑈 to 4 to achieve the best performance. For example, if we use
FP16 to store inner product results in LUT, for a 1,024-dimensional
query, we only need 1024/4 × 24 × 2B = 8KB to store all LUTs.
Once the LUTs are loaded into the GPU’s shared memory, they can
be shared with hundreds of threads within a thread block with low
access latency, enabling parallel inner-product evaluation for large
batches of 1-bit RaBitQ codes.
(2) Bitwise Decomposition based Strategy. While the LUT-based
approach is effective, it relies on query-dependent tables residing in
shared memory, which can limit on-chip residency and parallelism
for high-dimensional vectors or GPUs with relatively small shared
memory. To complement this memory-centric design, we revisit
the inner-product computation itself to develop a compute-centric
scheme that minimizes shared-memory usage and better exploits
GPU bitwise instructions.

The classical inner-product computation processes vectors di-
mension by dimension. On GPUs, however, there is no native in-
struction that multiplies a packed bit string directly with floating-
point values. As a result, a straightforward implementation must
first extract each 1-bit entry from the bit string ˆxb (at least at byte
granularity) before performing the multiplications. Inspired by
the bitwise decomposition in RaBitQ [18], we instead adopt a bit-
wise inner-product computation that contrasts with the classical
dimension-wise approach. The key idea is to reorganize the com-
putation so that each instruction processes multiple dimensions
at once using bit operations. To enable this, we first quantize each
rotated query into 𝐵q-bit signed integers ˆq. Based on Section 2.2,
this quantization is performed once per query and reused across
all probed clusters, contributing negligible overhead to the overall
search pipeline. With the quantized query, the target inner product
⟨ˆxb, q′⟩ can be rewritten as:

⟨ˆxb, q′⟩ ≈ Δq · ⟨ˆxb, ˆq⟩.
where Δq is the query quantization scale (step size) that maps
the integer-domain inner product back to its original scale (e.g.,
floating-point) .

(8)

Let ˆq[𝑖] be the 𝑖th dimension of ˆq where 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝐷 and
ˆq( 𝑗 ) [𝑖] ∈ {0, 1} be the 𝑗th bit of ˆq[𝑖] where 0 ≤ 𝑗 < 𝐵q (please
refer to presentation of ˆq in Figure 1 for illustration). The bitwise
decomposition can be represented using the following equation:

⟨ˆxb, ˆq⟩ =

𝐷
∑︁

𝑖=1

ˆxb [𝑖] · ˆq[𝑖]

𝐷
∑︁

=

𝑖=1

−2𝐵q −1 ˆq(𝐵q −1) [𝑖] +
ˆxb [𝑖] · (cid:169)
(cid:173)
(cid:171)
= −2𝐵q −1 ⟨ˆxb, ˆq(𝐵q −1) ⟩ +

𝐵q −2
∑︁

2𝑗 ⟨ˆxb, ˆq( 𝑗 ) ⟩

𝐵q −2
∑︁

𝑗=0

2𝑗 ˆq( 𝑗 ) [𝑖](cid:170)
(cid:174)
(cid:172)

(9)

(10)

(11)

𝑗=0

This equation depicts that the inner product can be viewed as a
weighted sum of inner products between binary vectors ˆxb and ˆq( 𝑗 ) .
As shown in Figure 1, the inner product between two binary vec-
tors can be efficiently computed via bitwise AND (&) and population
count (POPCNT) operations. Since GPU registers are 32 bits wide,
we can process 32 dimensions within a single operation, which
provides an advantage over classical dimension-wise inner-product
computation. Once ⟨ˆxb, ˆq( 𝑗 ) ⟩ is computed, the final weighted sum
can be obtained through several shift and add operations. Compared
to the LUT-based approach, the bitwise inner product trades addi-
tional integer arithmetic for a substantially smaller shared-memory
footprint. On GPU, only the quantized query representation needs
to be stored in shared memory (e.g., 0.5 KB for a 1,024-dimensional
query with 4-bit quantization), making this approach particularly
suitable for high-dimensional settings or scenarios where shared
memory is the limiting resource.

Fused Cluster-local Search Kernel. Building on the optimized
3.4.2
inner-product computation, we next design a fused cluster-local
search kernel to efficiently execute the two-stage distance estima-
tion on the GPU. Recall in Section 3.3.4 that the cluster-local search
procedure for a (query, cluster) pair (which finds the 𝐾 nearest
neighbors of the query within the cluster) consists of four logical
steps, namely (1) 1-bit estimated distance computation, (2) candi-
date selection, (3) refined estimated distance computation, and (4)
in-block top-𝐾 selection. A straightforward approach is to imple-
ment each of the these steps as a separate kernel. However, due to
data dependencies between consecutive steps, this design requires
launching multiple kernels sequentially, where each kernel loads
its inputs from global memory and writes intermediate results back
to global memory. We note that shared memory is scoped to a sin-
gle thread block and cannot be shared across blocks in different
kernels, which means that it is necessary to store intermediate
results in global memory between stages. Moreover, when work-
load imbalance arises across thread blocks, later kernels must wait

7

ˆxb[1]ˆxb[2]···ˆxb[D]ˆq(0)[1]ˆq(0)[2]···ˆq(0)[D]ˆq(1)[1]ˆq(1)[2]···ˆq(1)[D]............ˆq(Bq−1)[1]ˆq(Bq−1)[2]···ˆq(Bq−1)[D]&&&&popcntpopcnt...popcnt≪0≪1...≪(Bq−1)−2Bq−1⟨ˆxb,ˆq(Bq−1)⟩+Bq−2Xj=02j⟨ˆxb,ˆq(j)⟩DataVectorˆxbQueryVectorˆqInnerProductResultfor the completion of earlier ones, leading to long-tail effects and
underutilization of streaming multiprocessors (SMs).

To address these inefficiencies, we design a fused cluster-local
search kernel that integrates all four logical steps into a single
kernel execution. Rather than launching multiple kernels for differ-
ent stages, the fused design propagates intermediate results across
stages using on-chip memory, enabling block-level synchronization
instead of kernel-level synchronization. This design significantly
reduces kernel launch overhead, global-memory traffic, and syn-
chronization costs, especially under workload imbalance.

Kernel organization. The fused kernel adopts a block-centric
execution model, where each block takes a (query, cluster) pair as
an input and returns the cluster-local 𝐾-nearest neighbours for
the query. Upon launch, a block first loads the query-dependent
representation into shared memory. Depending on the selected
inner-product computation method (Section 3.4.1), this representa-
tion is either the precomputed lookup tables (LUTs) or the quantized
query vector used for bitwise inner-product evaluation. After that,
threads in the block collaboratively scan the data vectors in the clus-
ter and compute lower bounds of the 1-bit estimated distances. Each
thread processes one or more vectors and evaluates the inner prod-
uct between the query representation and the 1-bit RaBitQ codes.
Based on the inner product results, the 1-bit estimated distance
lower bounds are computed and compared against a query-specific
threshold (the current 𝐾-th largest distance among the candidates
found so far across clusters). Vectors whose lower bounds exceed
the threshold are pruned early, while the remaining vectors are
selected as candidates for further refinement. Then, the fused kernel
performs distance refinement for the surviving candidates. Since
the number of candidates typically constitutes a small fraction of
the cluster size, we assign groups of threads within a warp to co-
operatively process each candidate. Specifically, threads within a
warp jointly compute the inner product between the query and the
ex-codes of a candidate, which helps amortize the cost of access-
ing additional code bits and achieves better workload balance for
cases where the number of candidates is small. Using the refined
inner-product results together with the associated auxiliary factors,
the block computes the refined estimated distance for these candi-
dates. Finally, each block conducts a cluster-local top-𝐾 selection
using shared memory. After all vectors in the cluster have been
processed, the block writes the cluster-local top-𝐾 results back to
global memory for subsequent merging across clusters, and updates
the query-specific threshold atomically.

Shared-memory management via stage-aware reuse. A key
challenge of kernel fusion is managing shared-memory usage across
stages while preserving sufficient SM residency. Unlike CPU pro-
grams that can allocate and free memory dynamically, the shared-
memory footprint of a GPU kernel must be determined at launch
time, as it directly constrains the number of thread blocks that can
concurrently reside on an SM. Excessive shared-memory allocation
can therefore reduce occupancy and limit overall throughput. We
observe that the shared-memory requirements of different stages
in the fused kernel do not fully overlap in time. Specifically, the
memory used to store the query-dependent representation (i.e.,
lookup tables or quantized query vectors) is only needed during the
1-bit distance estimation stage, while later stages require shared

8

memory primarily for storing intermediate inner-product results,
candidate metadata, and top-𝐾 buffers. Exploiting this property,
we reuse shared-memory regions across stages whenever their life-
times do not overlap: (1) the shared-memory region initially used to
store the LUTs or quantized queries is reused to store intermediate
inner-product results during distance refinement; (2) the shared
memory allocated across the first three stages is repurposed as a
sorting buffer for maintaining the cluster-local top-𝐾 results in
the final stage. By carefully coordinating these reuse patterns, the
fused kernel achieves a substantially smaller peak shared-memory
footprint than a naive allocation that reserves separate buffers for
all stages.

3.4.3 GPU-Oriented Index Layout. To support efficient execution
of the fused kernel, we co-design a GPU-oriented index layout
that aligns data organization with cluster-local access patterns. IVF-
RaBitQ follows a flattened IVF organization inspired by Compressed
Sparse Row (CSR) [5] techniques, where vectors belonging to the
same cluster are stored contiguously and indexed via an offset
array. Building on this baseline organization, we further reorganize
RaBitQ codes and auxiliary data to improve data locality, memory
coalescing, and cache efficiency during GPU execution. This layout
is co-designed with the fused kernel to enable high-throughput
search on modern GPUs.

Stage-aware data decomposition. To match the multi-stage ex-
ecution of the fused kernel, the data associated with each cluster
is decomposed into multiple contiguous arrays according to their
usage patterns. Specifically, we separate the RaBitQ representa-
tion into short codes (the most significant bit, i.e., 1-bit RaBitQ
codes) and long codes (ex-codes), which are accessed in the filtering
and refinement stages, respectively. Correspondingly, auxiliary fac-
tors required for distance estimation are split into short-factor and
long-factor arrays, used for computing 1-bit distances and refined
distances, respectively. In addition, a Pid array stores the unique
identifier of each vector within the cluster. This stage-aware de-
composition improves data locality and avoids loading unused data
in early stages of the fused kernel.

Interleaved layout for 1-bit codes. Efficient inner-product com-
putation in the filtering stage requires high memory bandwidth
when accessing the 1-bit RaBitQ codes. On GPUs, global memory
accesses are serviced via aligned memory transactions (e.g., 32, 64,
or 128 bytes), and accesses from consecutive threads in a warp can
be coalesced when they target adjacent addresses. To exploit this
behavior, we design an interleaved layout for the 1-bit codes. As il-
lustrated in Figure 2, for a cluster containing 𝑛 vectors of dimension
𝐷, the 1-bit codes are grouped every 32 dimensions (e.g., dimensions
1–32, 33–64) and packed into 32-bit unsigned integers to match
the GPU register width. The storage is interleaved such that, for
each group of 32 dimensions, the packed codes of all 𝑛 vectors are
stored contiguously before proceeding to the next group. With this
layout, threads within a warp access adjacent 32-bit words when
processing the same dimension group across different vectors. As a
result, memory accesses are coalesced into 128-byte transactions
and fit within a single L1 cache line, enabling efficient utilization
of GPU memory bandwidth during inner-product computation.

Figure 2: Data layout for Inverted Lists in IVF-RaBitQ. nk is the number of clusters.

Table 1: Datasets used in evaluation. 𝑁 is the total number
of database vectors and 𝐷 is the number of dimensions.

Type
Name
Image
ImageNet
Code
CodeSearchNet
GIST
Image
OpenAI-3072-1M Text
OpenAI-1536-5M Text
Text
Wiki-all

𝑵
1,281,167
1,374,067
1,000,000
1,000,000
5,000,000
10,000,000

𝑫
512
768
960
3072
1536
768

Size (GB)
2.44
3.93
3.58
11.44
28.61
28.64

4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 Experimental Setup

Experimental Platform. The GPU-based experiments are con-
ducted on a machine provided by Amazon Web Services [2]. The
machine is equipped with a single NVIDIA L40S GPU with 48 GB
of device memory, and an AMD EPYC 7R13 processor providing
8 virtual CPU cores. The NVIDIA driver version is 590.48.01 with
CUDA 13.1. The CPU-based experiments are performed on a ma-
chine equipped with Intel Xeon Gold 6418H processors and 1 TB
of main memory. Both machines run Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (x86_64).
Datasets. We use six modern real-world high-dimensional vector
datasets to evaluate the performance, as detailed in Table 1. These
datasets are taken from the popular ANNS benchmarks and reflect
real-world ANNS search scenarios [9, 27, 41, 45]. The types include
image (ImageNet [10] and GIST [28]), code (CodeSearchNet [22]),
and text (OpenAI-3072-1M, OpenAI-1536-5M[41] and Wiki-all [45]).
For each dataset (except for Wiki-all), we exclude 10,000 vectors
from the dataset as query vectors, and use the rest of them as
base data vectors for index construction. For Wiki-all, the dataset
includes 10,000 query vectors already.
Baselines. We compare our method against several modern ANN
methods. For GPU-based methods, we first choose the widely used
clustering-based methods, IVF-Flat and IVF-PQ, implemented in
the cuVS Library [43]. These methods are built on the inverted
file (IVF) index. IVF-Flat [14] stores all database vectors in un-
compressed form. IVF-PQ [7] applies product quantization [28] to

9

compress database vectors into compact codes. It provides two op-
tions, namely one with refinement (named IVF-PQ (w/ref)) and the
other without refinement (named IVF-PQ (wo/ref)). IVF-PQ (w/ref)
re-evaluates shortlisted candidates produced based on the PQ codes
using raw data vectors to improve recall. Apart from GPU-based
methods that are based on clustering, we also include CAGRA [40], a
state-of-the-art graph-based GPU ANNS algorithm that constructs
and searches fixed-degree proximity graphs fully in parallel. For
CPU-based methods, we include RaBitQLib [16] (which implements
IVF-RaBitQ for ANNS with efficient SIMD instructions). Among
these competitors, IVF-PQ and RaBitQLib provide the option for
vector quantization. For IVF-PQ (w/ref) and IVF-PQ (wo/ref), we
choose the best index settings (e.g., quantization dimensions, quan-
tization bits, and number of clusters) for searching at Recall=0.95 to
evaluate the time-accuracy tradeoff. For IVF-RaBitQ and RaBitQLib,
we quantize each dimension of vectors to 8 bits unless mentioned
otherwise. For RaBitQ quantization on GPU, we empirically set
𝑁coarse and 𝑁fine to 64 and 32, respectively.
Benchmark. All experiments with GPU are conducted using
cuVS Bench [43], an open-source benchmarking suite developed
by NVIDIA for evaluating approximate nearest neighbor (ANN)
algorithms on GPUs. It enables fair comparison across methods by
enforcing consistent data loading, query batching, and performance
measurement under GPU-resident settings. We have extended the
cuVS Bench framework by integrating our IVF-RaBitQ into the cuVS
Library to allow fair comparison of IVF-RaBitQ with other GPU
methods under unified workloads. Unless mentioned otherwise, we
use 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 = 104 for the benchmark.

4.2 Experimental Results
4.2.1 GPU ANNS Search Performance. In this subsection, we evalu-
ate the GPU-based ANN search performance of IVF-RaBitQ against
other representative baselines. For IVF-RaBitQ, we report two differ-
ent GPU search modes: IVF-RaBitQ (LUT) and IVF-RaBitQ (Bitwise),
which correspond to two different inner production computation
methods (recall Section 3.4.1) used in our fused kernel. Our com-
petitors include IVF-PQ (with and without refinement), IVF-Flat,
and CAGRA. Figure 3 reports the time-accuracy trade-off for these
methods on six high-dimensional datasets. The performance is eval-
uated in QPS (query-per-second), and the accuracy is measured by

0012813502···Offset[nk-1]nk-1TotalnkOffsets(Indices)C[1]DataC[2]DataC[3]Data···C[nk]DataShortCodeC[1]DataC[2]DataC[3]Data···C[nk]DataShortFactorsC[1]DataC[2]DataC[3]Data···C[nk]DataLongCodeC[1]DataC[2]DataC[3]Data···C[nk]DataLongFactorsC[1]DataC[2]DataC[3]Data···C[nk]DataPidsStartContiguousmemoryforCluster2InterleavedDataLayoutforShortCodeˆxb,1[1-32]ˆxb,2[1-32]ˆxb,3[1-32]···ˆxb,n[1-32]ˆxb,1[33-64]ˆxb,2[33-64]ˆxb,3[33-64]···ˆxb,n[33-64]...............ˆxb,1[D-31...D]ˆxb,2[D-31...D]ˆxb,3[D-31...D]···ˆxb,n[D-31...D]Dims1-32Dims33-64...DimsD-31...Dˆxb,1ˆxb,2ˆxb,3···ˆxb,nFigure 3: Time–accuracy trade-off of ANN search on representative datasets (log-scale). Bitwise and LUT denote the two GPU
inner-product methods used by IVF-RaBitQ, while w/ refine and w/o refine indicate whether distance refinement is enabled for
IVF-PQ.

Recall@K (the ratio of true nearest neighbors found in the top-𝐾
results returned by an ANNS algorithm ). Based on the results, we
have the following observations.

(1) Overall performance trends. IVF-RaBitQ consistently achieves
high query throughput while maintaining strong recall across all
datasets. Compared with all competitors, IVF-RaBitQ provides sub-
stantially higher throughput at medium-to-high recall regimes
(0.85–1).

(2) Comparison among IVF-based methods. Across all datasets,
IVF-RaBitQ significantly outperforms IVF-PQ in terms of through-
put, especially at higher recall targets. Although IVF-PQ with refine-
ment (denoted as IVF-PQ (w/ref)) improves retrieval accuracy by
introducing an additional refinement stage, it still incurs consider-
able computational and memory overhead when using raw vectors
for reranking. In contrast, IVF-RaBitQ attains a more favorable
efficiency–accuracy balance without relying on reranking of raw
vectors. To be specific, for Recall=0.95, IVF-RaBitQ has 2.0×~31.4×
speedup compared to IVF-PQ without refinement (denoted as IVF-
PQ (wo/ref)), and 1.3×~5.3× speedup compared to IVF-PQ (w/ref).
(3) Comparison with CAGRA. IVF-RaBitQ demonstrates compa-
rable or higher throughput than CAGRA across most datasets and
recall ranges. IVF-RaBitQ benefits from compression while CAGRA
works with uncompressed data. On average, IVF-RaBitQ (Bitwise)
achieves a speed up of 1.8×, 2.2×, 3.3× compared to CAGRA for
recall=0.9, 0.95, 0.99@10, respectively. The performance advantage

becomes more evident on higher recall, which highlights the advan-
tage of cache reuse while probing many clusters for a large batch
of queries.

(4) Bitwise vs. LUT-based GPU kernels. We further investigate
two inner product computation methods for IVF-RaBitQ: a bit-
wise inner-product kernel and a lookup-table (LUT) based kernel.
Both implementations achieve high performance across all datasets.
As dimensionality increases, the LUT-based kernel is bounded by
shared-memory capacity, whereas the bitwise formulation remains
lightweight and scalable which is reflected by gap between the two
methods on the OpenAI-3072-1M dataset. We note that the relative
performance of these two methods may vary based on the memory
bandwidth and shared memory size of different GPUs.

(5) Scalability across dataset sizes and dimensionalities. Across
datasets ranging from 1M to 10M vectors and dimensions from 512
to 3072, IVF-RaBitQ maintains robust performance and consistent
throughput advantages.

Index Build Time. Figure 4 shows the index build time for
4.2.2
the indexes used in Section 4.2.1. For all IVF-based methods, we
use one-tenth of the dataset vectors to train the clusters and align
the number of clusters to be trained. Also, we align the IVF-PQ and
IVF-RaBitQ to use the same compression ratio for quantization (i.e.,
8 bits per dimension). We observe that IVF-RaBitQ has a very short
index build time across all evaluated datasets. When compared
with CAGRA, the proposed method attains an average speedup

10

0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10103104105106QPSImageNet0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50103104105106QPSImageNet0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10103104105QPSCodeSearchNet0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50103104105QPSCodeSearchNet0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10103104105QPSGIST0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50103104105QPSGIST0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10102103104105QPSOpenAI-3072-1M0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50102103104105QPSOpenAI-3072-1M0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10102103104105QPSOpenAI-1536-5M0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50102103104105QPSOpenAI-1536-5M0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10103104105QPSWiki-all0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@50103104105QPSWiki-allIVF-RaBitQ (Bitwise)IVF-RaBitQ (LUT)CAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLATFigure 4: Index build time across different datasets. Each subplot compares build time across methods.

Figure 5: Storage requirement of different indexing methods. CAGRA and IVF-PQ (w/ref) require RAW vectors for refinement,
thus RAW storage is included.

of 7.7×. This is because CAGRA needs to spend more time on
its KNN graph building and graph optimization procedures. This
overhead becomes increasingly dominant as the dataset scale and
dimensionality grow. Compared with other IVF-based methods,
IVF-RaBitQ is overall faster than IVF-PQ (with a 4.4× speedup on
average) and is only suboptimal to IVF-Flat. Our proposed parallel
quantization algorithm takes 𝑂 (1) rounds to quantize a vector, and
does not need to train codebooks as IVF-PQ does. At the same time,
due to the efficient quantization of RaBitQ, our method incurs lower
memory write volume compared to IVF-Flat. When data scale grows,
the bottleneck of IVF-based methods shifts from quantization to
clustering, which leads to a smaller performance gap between IVF-
RaBitQ and IVF-PQ.

Space-Accuracy Trade-off. IVF-RaBitQ offers flexible and fine-
4.2.4
grained control over the space–accuracy trade-off by offering differ-
ent bits for quantization. In this subsection, we further investigate
the trade-off between storage efficiency and retrieval accuracy by
varying the bits used to quantize a dimension in IVF-RaBitQ. For
the inner product computation, we use the bitwise method. Figure 6
shows the Recall–QPS curves under different bit configurations
on two representative datasets with different dimensions. For a
low-recall region (e.g., recall less than 0.6), 1-bit IVF-RaBitQ has a
significant advantage over other bit settings. This is because it does
not need to access the ex-code to refine the 1-bit estimated distance.
We observe that for 𝐵 = 5 and 𝐵 = 7, IVF-RaBitQ is sufficient to
produce > 0.95 and 0.99 recall, respectively.

Storage Requirement. We analyze the storage requirement of
4.2.3
different ANN indices, which is the total amount of data that must be
stored to support search, as shown in Figure 5. We note that IVF-PQ
(wo /ref) uses the same compression ratio (8 bits per dimension for
a floating-point vector) as IVF-RaBitQ. CAGRA, IVF-Flat, and IVF-
PQ with refinement need to store the raw data vectors to support
exact or refined distance computation, which significantly increases
their storage demand. Compared to these methods, IVF-RaBitQ
only needs less than 25% of their storage requirement to achieve a
comparable recall. For example, on Wiki-all (10M, 𝐷 = 768), IVF-
RaBitQ requires only 7.49 gigabytes of storage, whereas CAGRA
and IVF-PQ (w/ref) consume more than 30 GB. Compared with
IVF-PQ (wo/ref), which does not store raw vectors, IVF-RaBitQ
achieves a similar storage footprint while delivering substantially
higher recall and query throughput. This advantage could enable
deploying large-scale ANN systems within the limited memory
budget of modern GPUs.

Figure 6: Space-Performance trade-off of IVF-RaBitQ.

4.2.5 Comparison with CPU-based Counterpart. We further com-
pare IVF-RaBitQ (GPU) with the bitwise inner product computation
method and its counterpart on CPU, for which we adopt the im-
plementation from the RaBitQLib [16]. The CPU counterpart is
evaluated on an Intel Xeon Gold 6418H processor (24 cores, 48
threads), which represents a high-performance server-class CPU
platform. Figure 7 reports the time-accuracy trade-off curves on

11

IVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT012345Build Time (s)ImageNetIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT0246CodeSearchNetIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT012345GISTIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT0.02.55.07.510.012.515.0OpenAI-3072-1MIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT0102030405060OpenAI-1536-5MIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLAT0204060Wiki-allIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQIVF-FLATIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Size (GiB)ImageNetIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT012345CodeSearchNetIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT01234GISTIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT0.02.55.07.510.012.515.0OpenAI-3072-1MIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT0102030OpenAI-1536-5MIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT0102030Wiki-allRAW vectorsIVF-RaBitQCAGRAIVF-PQ (w/ref)IVF-PQ (wo/ref)IVF-FLAT0.50.60.70.80.91.0Recall@10105106QPSImageNet0.50.60.70.80.91.0Recall@10105106QPSGISTB=1B=3B=5B=7B=9and tailor the traversal strategy for higher GPU throughput. CA-
GRA [40] proposes a fast search algorithm that exploits software
warp splitting and lightweight (forgettable) hash-table manage-
ment to improve GPU utilization. BANG [48] targets graph-based
billion-scale search, which introduces a parallel merge algorithm
and integrates a bloom filter for acceleration.

Cluster-based ANNS on GPU. While most graph-based meth-
ods focus on maximizing the search throughput, the cluster-based
methods usually deliver faster index builds, lower memory usage,
and a strong balance between speed and accuracy [30]. In 2016,
Wieschollek et.al. proposed a two-level product and vector quan-
tization tree that reduces the number of vector comparisons for
ANNS tree traversal, which firstly demonstrates GPU performance
is superior to CPU performance in large-scale ANN problems [50].
Later, FAISS [24] develops a high-performance top-𝐾 selection al-
gorithm on a GPU and integrates it with IVF-PQ for billion-scale
ANNS search on multiple GPUs. Chen et. al. proposed a hierarchical
inverted index structure generated by line quantization to enable
more fine-grained search in IVF [6]. Recently, Nvidia cuVS [43] fur-
ther optimizes LUT residency in shared memory (via low-precision
LUT types and kernel-path switching), and employs fused/early-
stop kernels for IVF-PQ, making it a state-of-the-art implementation
for IVF-PQ on GPU. Rummy [56] and FusionANNS [46] both focus
on the scenario when vector data is larger than the GPU global
memory, where Rummy is based on pure IVF and FusionANNS fur-
ther extends it with Product Quantization and a navigation graph.
JUNO [33] utilizes ray-tracing cores on GPU for ANNS acceleration,
which implements a sparsity-and locality-aware search algorithm to
select approximate top-𝐾 neighbour candidates. In contrast to these
GPU cluster-based soltions that primarily build on IVF-Flat/IVF-PQ
(and their codebook-based distance estimators), our IVF-RaBitQ
integrates RaBitQ and introduces GPU-native quantization, inner-
product computation, and fused-kernel designs tailored to this
method.

6 CONCLUSION
We present IVF-RaBitQ (GPU), an end-to-end GPU-native ANNS
framework that integrates IVF partitioning with RaBitQ quantiza-
tion. IVF-RaBitQ enables fast index build, high-throughput search,
high recall, and compact storage by combining a scalable GPU
quantization pipeline, GPU-native inner-product computation, a
fused cluster-local search kernel, and a GPU-oriented index layout.
We further integrate IVF-RaBitQ into NVIDIA cuVS and the cuVS
bench pipeline to support reproducible evaluation and fair compar-
isons with existing GPU baselines. Experiments on various datasets
show that IVF-RaBitQ offers a strong trade-off frontier across re-
call, throughput, build time, and memory footprint, especially in
high-recall regimes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely appreciate the insightful discussions and construc-
tive suggestions provided by Artem Chirkin, Akira Naruse, and
Hiroyuki Ootomo at NVIDIA, as well as Yutong Gou and Yuexuan
Xu at Nanyang Technological University.

12

Figure 7: Time-accuracy trade-off comparison between IVF-
RaBitQ (GPU) and its CPU counterpart from RaBitQLib. The
GPU implementation runs on an NVIDIA L40S, and the CPU
counterpart runs on an Intel Xeon Gold 6418H (24 cores, 48
threads).

two representative datasets. At Recall@10 = 0.9, 0.95, and 0.99, IVF-
RaBitQ (GPU) achieves average QPS speedups of 13.0×, 12.9×, and
12.5×, respectively over its CPU counterpart. Moreover, IVF-RaBitQ
(GPU) achieves the same accuracy (recall) as its CPU counterpart,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our GPU-quantization algorithm.

5 RELATED WORK
Graph-Based ANNS on GPU. Graph-based methods typically
build a proximity graph and answer queries by iteratively expand-
ing a candidate frontier from one or a few entry points, while prun-
ing candidates based on distance comparisons. A branch of recent
study utilizes modern GPUs to accelerate graph index construc-
tion. Graph-based GPU Nearest Neighbor (GGNN) [21] proposes a
parallel, bottom-up hierarchical construction algorithm that recur-
sively merges smaller, independent sub-graphs into a final global
index. Yu et al. [54] developed GGraphCon, a GPU-based graph
construction framework that uses a divide-and-conquer framework
that partitions the graph building into different small tasks, and a
sort-based strategy to build high-quality graphs in parallel. CAGRA
[40] designs a search implementation-centric proximity graph con-
struction method optimized for GPU, which utilizes a fixed-degree
structure and a novel rank-based reordering strategy to optimize
graph connectivity. A recent work, concurrent with ours, develops
a graph-based method called Jasper for ANNS on GPU, which uses
RaBitQ for vector quantization and supports data updates [37]. We
note that this work computes the rescaling factor on the CPU, while
performing the rescaling and rounding on the GPU - an execution
split that distinguishes it from our approach. Tagore [32] integrates
a two-phase GNN-Descent algorithm for rapid graph initialization
and a unified Collect-Filter-Store (CFS) framework with specialized
parallel kernels for fast graph edge pruning on GPU. The graph
index usually occupies a lot of space, whereas few methods can
achieve high recall with a small index size.

The graph-based ANNS search algorithms work cooperatively
with the graph index, and recent GPU designs mainly focus on ac-
celerating graph traversal and candidate management (e.g., priority
queues, visited sets, and hash-table-based filtering) under massive
parallelism. SONG [57] is the first work to implement graph-based
ANNS search on GPU, adopting a three-stage pipeline with an
optimized priority queue and hash tables for NSW [35]. GGNN
[21] and GANNS [54] further use hierarchical graph structures

0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10104105106QPSImageNet0.800.850.900.951.00Recall@10104105QPSGISTIVF-RaBitQ (GPU)RaBitQLib (CPU)REFERENCES
[1] Cecilia Aguerrebere, Ishwar Singh Bhati, Mark Hildebrand, Mariano Tepper,
and Theodore Willke. 2023. Similarity Search in the Blink of an Eye with
Compressed Indices. Proc. VLDB Endow. 16, 11 (July 2023), 3433–3446. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3611479.3611537

[2] Amazon Web Services, Inc. 2026. Amazon EC2 G6e Instances. https://aws.

amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/g6e/. Accessed: 2026-02-23.

[3] David Arthur and Sergei Vassilvitskii. 2007. k-means++: the advantages of
careful seeding. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
on Discrete Algorithms (New Orleans, Louisiana) (SODA ’07). Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, USA, 1027–1035.

[4] Fedor Borisyuk, Siddarth Malreddy, Jun Mei, Yiqun Liu, Xiaoyi Liu, Piyush
Maheshwari, Anthony Bell, and Kaushik Rangadurai. 2021. VisRel: Media
Search at Scale. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery & Data Mining (Virtual Event, Singapore) (KDD ’21). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2584–2592.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467081

[5] Aydin Buluç, Jeremy T. Fineman, Matteo Frigo, John R. Gilbert, and Charles E.
Leiserson. 2009. Parallel sparse matrix-vector and matrix-transpose-vector mul-
tiplication using compressed sparse blocks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First
Annual Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures (Calgary, AB,
Canada) (SPAA ’09). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
233–244. https://doi.org/10.1145/1583991.1584053

[6] Wei Chen, Jincai Chen, Fuhao Zou, Yuan-Fang Li, Ping Lu, Qiang Wang, and Wei
Zhao. 2019. Vector and line quantization for billion-scale similarity search
on GPUs. Future Generation Computer Systems 99 (2019), 295–307.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.04.033

[7] Artem Chirkin, Akira Naruse, Tamás Fehér, Yong Wang, and Corey Nolet. 2024.
Accelerating Vector Search: NVIDIA cuVS IVF-PQ (Part 1, Deep Dive). NVIDIA
Technical Blog. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-vector-search-
nvidia-cuvs-ivf-pq-deep-dive-part-1/

[8] Yannis Chronis, Helena Caminal, Yannis Papakonstantinou, Fatma Özcan, and
Anastasia Ailamaki. 2025. Filtered Vector Search: State-of-the-Art and Research
Opportunities. Proc. VLDB Endow. 18, 12 (Aug. 2025), 5488–5492. https://doi.
org/10.14778/3750601.3750700

[9] CSE, CUHK. 2018. GQR Datasets. https://www.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/systems/hash/

[10]

[11]

gqr/datasets.html. Accessed: 2026-01-29.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Im-
ageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 248–255. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
2009.5206848
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT:
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
arXiv:1810.04805 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805

[12] Xin Luna Dong. 2024. The Journey to A Knowledgeable Assistant with Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG). In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (Merida, Mexico) (WSDM ’24). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3616855.3638207

[13] Ming Du, Arnau Ramisa, Amit Kumar K C, Sampath Chanda, Mengjiao Wang,
Neelakandan Rajesh, Shasha Li, Yingchuan Hu, Tao Zhou, Nagashri Lakshmi-
narayana, Son Tran, and Doug Gray. 2022. Amazon Shop the Look: A Visual
Search System for Fashion and Home. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Washington DC, USA)
(KDD ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2822–2830.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539071

[14] Tamás Fehér, Artem Chirkin, Christina Zhang, and Mahesh Doijade. 2023. Accel-
erated Vector Search: Approximating with NVIDIA cuVS Inverted Index. NVIDIA
Technical Blog. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerated-vector-search-
approximating-with-nvidia-cuvs-ivf-flat/

[17]

[16]

[15] Cong Fu, Chao Xiang, Changxu Wang, and Deng Cai. 2019. Fast approximate
nearest neighbor search with the navigating spreading-out graph. Proc. VLDB
Endow. 12, 5 (Jan. 2019), 461–474. https://doi.org/10.14778/3303753.3303754
Jianyang Gao, Yutong Gou, Yuexuan Xu, Jifan Shi, Zhonghao Yang, and Cheng
Long. 2025. The RaBitQ Library. In The 1st Workshop on Vector Databases. https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=OeZHhOsFir
Jianyang Gao, Yutong Gou, Yuexuan Xu, Yongyi Yang, Cheng Long, and Raymond
Chi-Wing Wong. 2025. Practical and Asymptotically Optimal Quantization of
High-Dimensional Vectors in Euclidean Space for Approximate Nearest Neighbor
Search. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 3, 3, Article 202 (June 2025), 26 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3725413
Jianyang Gao and Cheng Long. 2024. RaBitQ: Quantizing High-Dimensional
Vectors with a Theoretical Error Bound for Approximate Nearest Neighbor
Search. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 2, 3, Article 167 (May 2024), 27 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3654970

[18]

[19] Google AI. 2024. Embeddings | Gemini API | Google AI for Developers. https:

//ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/embeddings. Accessed: 2026-02-01.

13

[20] Yutong Gou, Jianyang Gao, Yuexuan Xu, and Cheng Long. 2025. SymphonyQG:
Towards Symphonious Integration of Quantization and Graph for Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 3, 1, Article 80 (Feb. 2025),
26 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3709730

[21] Fabian Groh, Lukas Ruppert, Patrick Wieschollek, and Hendrik P. A. Lensch.
2023. GGNN: Graph-Based GPU Nearest Neighbor Search. IEEE Transactions on
Big Data 9, 1 (2023), 267–279. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2022.3161156

[22] Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc
Brockschmidt. 2019. CodeSearchNet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic
code search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09436 (2019).

[23] Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Fnu Devvrit, Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, Ravishankar
Krishnawamy, and Rohan Kadekodi. 2019. DiskANN: Fast Accurate Billion-point
Nearest Neighbor Search on a Single Node. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox,
and R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/09853c7fb1d3f8ee67a61b6bf4a7f8e6-Paper.pdf
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2021. Billion-Scale Similarity
Search with GPUs. IEEE Transactions on Big Data 7, 3 (2021), 535–547. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2019.2921572

[24]

[25] William B Johnson and Joram Lindenstrauss. 1984. Extensions of Lipschitz
mappings into a Hilbert space 26. Contemporary mathematics 26 (1984), 28.
js1010. 2021. cuhnsw: CUDA implementation of Hierarchical Navigable Small
World Graph algorithm. https://github.com/js1010/cuhnsw. GitHub repository,
Accessed: 2026-02-01.

[26]

[27] Elias Jääsaari, Ville Hyvönen, Matteo Ceccarello, Teemu Roos, and Mar-
VIBE: Vector Index Benchmark for Embeddings.

tin Aumüller. 2025.
arXiv:2505.17810 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17810

[28] Herve Jégou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. 2011. Product Quantization
for Nearest Neighbor Search. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 33, 1 (2011), 117–128. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2010.57
[29] Sukjin Kim, Seongyeon Park, Si Ung Noh, Junguk Hong, Taehee Kwon, Hunseong
Lim, and Jinho Lee. 2025. PathWeaver: a high-throughput multi-GPU system
for graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the 2025
USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual Technical Conference (Boston, MA, USA)
(USENIX ATC ’25). USENIX Association, USA, Article 89, 17 pages.
Jack Li. 2025. Understanding IVF Vector Index: How It Works and When to
Choose It Over HNSW. Milvus Blog. https://milvus.io/blog/understanding-ivf-
vector-index-how-It-works-and-when-to-choose-it-over-hnsw.md Accessed:
2026-01-03.

[30]

[31] Wen Li, Ying Zhang, Yifang Sun, Wei Wang, Mingjie Li, Wenjie Zhang, and
Xuemin Lin. 2020. Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search on High Dimensional
Data — Experiments, Analyses, and Improvement. IEEE Transactions on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering 32, 8 (2020), 1475–1488. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.
2019.2909204

[32] Zhonggen Li, Xiangyu Ke, Yifan Zhu, Bocheng Yu, Baihua Zheng, and Yunjun Gao.
2025. Scalable Graph Indexing using GPUs for Approximate Nearest Neighbor
Search. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 3, 6, Article 360 (Dec. 2025), 27 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3769825

[33] Zihan Liu, Wentao Ni, Jingwen Leng, Yu Feng, Cong Guo, Quan Chen, Chao
JUNO: Optimizing High-Dimensional
Li, Minyi Guo, and Yuhao Zhu. 2024.
Approximate Nearest Neighbour Search with Sparsity-Aware Algorithm and Ray-
Tracing Core Mapping. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume
2 (La Jolla, CA, USA) (ASPLOS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 549–565. https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640360

[34] Mikko I. Malinen and Pasi Fränti. 2014. Balanced K-Means for Clustering. In
Proceedings of the Joint IAPR International Workshop on Structural, Syntactic, and
Statistical Pattern Recognition - Volume 8621 (Joensuu, Finland) (S+SSPR 2014).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 32–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-
44415-3_4

[35] Yury Malkov, Alexander Ponomarenko, Andrey Logvinov, and Vladimir Krylov.
2014. Approximate nearest neighbor algorithm based on navigable small world
graphs. Information Systems 45 (2014), 61–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2013.
10.006

[36] Yu A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. 2020. Efficient and Robust Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search Using Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 42, 4 (April 2020), 824–836. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473

[37] Hunter McCoy, Zikun Wang, and Prashant Pandey. 2026. GPU-Accelerated
ANNS: Quantized for Speed, Built for Change. arXiv:2601.07048 [cs.DB] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2601.07048
James B McQueen. 1967. Some methods of classification and analysis of multi-
variate observations. In Proc. of 5th Berkeley Symposium on Math. Stat. and Prob.
281–297.

[38]

[39] NVIDIA Corporation. 2026. cuVS Benchmark — cuVS documentation. https:

//docs.rapids.ai/api/cuvs/stable/cuvs_bench/. Accessed: 2026-02-26.

[40] Hiroyuki Ootomo, Akira Naruse, Corey Nolet, Ray Wang, Tamas Feher, and Yong
Wang. 2024. CAGRA: Highly Parallel Graph Construction and Approximate
Nearest Neighbor Search for GPUs . In 2024 IEEE 40th International Conference

on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
4236–4247. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE60146.2024.00323

[41] OpenAI. 2024. New embedding models and API updates. https://openai.com/
index/new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/. Accessed: 2026-01-29.
[42] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh,
Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark,
Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models
From Natural Language Supervision. arXiv:2103.00020 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.00020

[43] RAPIDS AI. [n.d.]. rapidsai/cuvs: cuVS – a library for vector search and clustering
on the GPU. GitHub repository. https://github.com/rapidsai/cuvs Accessed:
2026-01-03.

[44] RAPIDS AI. 2025. K-Means — cuVS C++ API Documentation (stable 25.12).
RAPIDS cuVS documentation. https://docs.rapids.ai/api/cuvs/stable/cpp_api/
cluster_kmeans/ Accessed: 2026-01-26.

[45] RAPIDS Team. 2024. Wiki-all Dataset — cuVS Documentation. https://docs.
rapids.ai/api/cuvs/stable/cuvs_bench/wiki_all_dataset/. Accessed: 2026-01-29.
[46] Bing Tian, Haikun Liu, Yuhang Tang, Shihai Xiao, Zhuohui Duan, Xiaofei Liao,
Hai Jin, Xuecang Zhang, Junhua Zhu, and Yu Zhang. 2025. Towards high-
throughput and low-latency billion-scale vector search via CPU/GPU collabora-
tive filtering and re-ranking. In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (Santa Clara, CA, USA) (FAST ’25). USENIX Association,
USA, Article 11, 15 pages.

[47] Dan Vanderkam, Rob Schonberger, Henry Rowley, and Sanjiv Kumar. 2013.
Nearest Neighbor Search in Google Correlate. Technical Report. Google. http:
//www.google.com/trends/correlate/nnsearch.pdf

[48] Karthik Venkatasubba, Saim Khan, Somesh Singh, Harsha Vardhan Simhadri, and
Jyothi Vedurada. 2025. BANG: Billion-Scale Approximate Nearest Neighbour
Search Using a Single GPU . IEEE Transactions on Big Data 11, 06 (Dec. 2025),
3142–3157. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2025.3581085

[49] Hui Wang, Wan-Lei Zhao, Xiangxiang Zeng, and Jianye Yang. 2021. Fast k-NN
Graph Construction by GPU based NN-Descent. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management (Virtual Event,
Queensland, Australia) (CIKM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1929–1938. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482344

[50] Patrick Wieschollek, Oliver Wang, Alexander Sorkine-Hornung, and Hendrik
P. A. Lensch. 2016. Efficient Large-Scale Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search
on the GPU. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2027–2035. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.223

[51] Wikipedia contributors. 2024. Wikipedia:Pageview statistics — Wikipedia, The
Free Encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Pageview_statistics.
Accessed: 2026-02-01.
Jingyi Xi, Chenghao Mo, Ben Karsin, Artem Chirkin, Mingqin Li, and Minjia
Zhang. 2025. VecFlow: A High-Performance Vector Data Management System
for Filtered-Search on GPUs. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 3, 4, Article 271 (Sept.
2025), 27 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3749189

[52]

[53] Yuxiang Yang, Shiwen Chen, Yangshen Deng, and Bo Tang. 2025. ParaGraph:
Accelerating Graph Indexing through GPU-CPU Parallel Processing for Efficient
Cross-modal ANNS. In Proceedings of the 21st International Workshop on Data
Management on New Hardware (DaMoN ’25). Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, Article 7, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3736227.
3736237

[55]

[54] Yuanhang Yu, Dong Wen, Ying Zhang, Lu Qin, Wenjie Zhang, and Xuemin Lin.
2022. GPU-accelerated Proximity Graph Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search
and Construction. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering
(ICDE). 552–564. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00046
Jingrong Zhang, Akira Naruse, Xipeng Li, and Yong Wang. 2023. Parallel Top-K
Algorithms on GPU: A Comprehensive Study and New Methods. In Proceedings
of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis (Denver, CO, USA) (SC ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 76, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3581784.3607062

[56] Zili Zhang, Fangyue Liu, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2024. Fast vector
query processing for large datasets beyond GPU memory with reordered pipelin-
ing. In Proceedings of the 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (Santa Clara, CA, USA) (NSDI’24). USENIX Association, USA,
Article 2, 18 pages.

[57] Weijie Zhao, Shulong Tan, and Ping Li. 2020. SONG: Approximate Nearest
Neighbor Search on GPU. In 2020 IEEE 36th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE). 1033–1044. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE48307.2020.00094

14

